--- PAGE 1 ---
EngineeringApplicationsofArtiﬁcialIntelligence14(2001)167–181
Evolutionaryalgorithms,simulatedannealingandtabusearch:
acomparativestudy
HabibYoussef*,SadiqM.Sait,HakimAdiche
Department of Computer Engineering, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, KFUPM Box # 673, Dhahran-31261, Saudi Arabia
Received1July1999;receivedinrevisedform1June2000;accepted1July2000
Abstract
Evolutionary algorithms, simulated annealing (SA), and tabu search (TS) are general iterative algorithms for combinatorial
optim ization. The termevolutionary algorithmis used to refer to any probabilistic algorithmwhose design is inspired by
evolutionarymechanismsfoundinbiologicalspecies.Mostwidelyknownalgorithmsofthiscategoryaregeneticalgorithms(GA).
GA,SA,andTShavebeenfoundtobeveryeﬀectiveandrobustinsolvingnumerousproblemsfromawiderangeofapplication
domains.Furthermore,theyareevensuitableforill-posedproblemswheresomeoftheparametersarenotknownbeforehand.
Thesepropertiesarelackinginalltraditionaloptimizationtechniques.InthispaperweperformacomparativestudyamongGA,
SA, and TS. These algorithms have many similarities, but they also possess distinctive features, mainly in their strategies for
searchingthesolutionstatespace.Thethreeheuristicsareappliedonthesameoptimizationproblemandcomparedwithrespectto
(1)qualityofthebestsolutionidentiﬁedbyeachheuristic,(2)progressofthesearchfrominitialsolution(s)untilstoppingcriteria
aremet,(3)theprogressofthecostofthebestsolutionasafunctionoftime(iterationcount),and(4)thenumberofsolutionsfound
atsuccessiveintervalsofthecostfunction.Thebenchmarkproblemusedistheﬂoorplanningofverylargescaleintegrated(VLSI)
circuits.Thisisahardmulti-criteriaoptimizationproblem.Fuzzylogicisusedtocombineallobjectivecriteriaintoasinglefuzzy
evaluation(cost)function,whichisthenusedtoratecompetingsolutions. # 2001 ElsevierScienceLtd.Allrightsreserved.
Keywords: Geneticalgorithms;Simulatedannealing;Tabusearch;Fuzzylogic;Floorplanning;Combinatorialoptimization;VLSI
1. Introduction
This paper is concerned with one class of combina-
torial optimization algorithms: general iterati ve al-
gorithms, which constitute a class ofapproximation
algorithms. The growing interest in this class of
algorithms is attributed to their generality, ease of
implementation,andmainly,theirrobustnessinsolving
awidevarietyofproblemsfromarangeofapplication
domains. We shall limit ourselves to three popular
iterativealgorithms,(1)geneticalgorithm,(2)simulated
annealing,and,(3)tabusearch. All threeoptimization
heuristics have several similarities, namely (Sait and
Youssef,1999a):
1. They are approximation (heuristic) algorithms, i.e.,
theydonotguaranteeﬁndinganoptimalsolution.
2. Theyareblind,inthattheydonotknowwhenthey
reachedanoptimalsolution.Thereforetheymustbe
toldwhentostop.
3. They have ‘‘hill climbing’’ property, i.e., they
occasionallyacceptuphill(bad)moves.
4. Theyaregeneral,i.e.,theycaneasilybeengineeredto
implementanycombinatorialoptimizationproblem;
all that is required is to have a suitable solution
representation,acostfunction,andamechanismto
traversethesearchspace.
5. Under certain conditions, they asymptotically con-
vergetoanoptimalsolution.
The question of how to compare two constructive
algorithms has long been settled. Two measures are
typicallyused:(1)thetimecomplexityofthealgorithm,
and,(2)thequalityofsolution,i.e.,howfarwouldthe
solution be fromoptim al in the worst or best case. In
most cases, the time complexity of a constructive
algorithmisusuallyeasytoderive;however,determin-
ing the quality of solution relative to the optimum is
usuallyverydiﬃcult,andinsomecasesnotpossible.
*Corresponding author. Tel.: +966-3-860-4286; fax: +966-3-860-
3059.
E-mail address:youssef@ccse.kfupm.edu.sa(H.Youssef).
0952-1976/01/$-seefrontmatter # 2001 ElsevierScienceLtd.Allrightsreserved.
PII:S 0952-1976(00)00065-8
--- PAGE 2 ---
For iterative approximation algorithms, the time
complexity is mostly a function of the number of
iterations allowed for the algorithmas well as the
complexity of the evaluation function. The various
operatorsofthealgorithmaswellastheproblemtobe
solved can also have determining eﬀect on the time
complexity of the algorithm. However, typically, all
implementations of approximation iterative algorithms
have polynomial time complexity. Thus the time
complexityisnotofconcernwhencomparingheuristics
in this category. Of major importance however is the
qualityofsolution(s)foundbyaparticularheuristicfor
the problemclass at hand. That is, if for exam ple, a
giveniterativeapproximationalgorithmA1performson
average better than a second algorithmA2 over a
numberofprobleminstances,wethenconcludethatA1
implementation is better than that of A2. Another
legitimate comparison would be with respect to the
quality of the solution subspace examined by each
algorithm.Thatis,ifthenumberofsolutionsobtained
with algorithmA1 with a cost lower than a particular
value C is higher than that of algorithmA2, we then
conclude that A1 exhibits superior performance than
A2. Yet another comparison would be with respect to
the progress ofthe best solutionversus the numberof
iterations. In this paper we report a number of
experimentsperformedtocomparetheperformanceof
three well-known approximation iterative algorithms
with respect to criteria such as those described above.
Thetestproblemusedisﬂoorplanning,ahardproblem
encounteredduringthephysicaldesignofVLSIcircuits.
Itisencounteredinseveralotherareasofengineeringas
well.InVLSIdesign,aﬂoorplanningtoolhelpsdecide
severalimportant questionssuchasdimensions, orien-
tationsandlocationofcells(orblocks),overallrequired
areaofthecircuit,andspeedperformancerequirements
(SaitandYoussef,1995).
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2
formulates ﬂoorplanning as a combinatorial optimiza-
tion problem. In Section 3 we describe how a ﬂoor-
planning solution is encoded and evaluated. The same
solutionencodingandevaluationfunctionareusedwith
all three approximation algorithms. Section 4 brieﬂy
discusses the main features and operators of each of
GA,SA,andTSalgorithms.InSection5,experimental
results are presented and the performance of the three
heuristicsarecompared.WeconcludeinSection6.
2. Floorplanning
Apossibleformulationoftheﬂoorplanningproblem
ofVLSIcircuitsisasfollows(SaitandYoussef,1995):
Given:
1. A set of n rectangular blocks B ¼f b
1; b2; ...;
bi; ...; bng;foreach bi 2 Bwehave
* wi; hi: width and height of bi, which are
constants for rigid blocks and variable for
ﬂexibleblocks.
* ri: desirable aspect ratio about each variable-
shape block where 1=ri4hi=wi4ri; ri ¼1i f
block iisrigid.
* ai:areaof bi (i.e., ai ¼ wi /C2hi), ai isconstant.
2. Asetof nets N ¼f n1; n2; ... ; ni; ...; nkgdescrib-
ingtheconnectivityinformation.
3. Desirable ﬂoorplan aspect ratio r such that
1=r4H=W4r; whereH and W are the height
andwidthoftheﬂoorplan,respectively.
4. Timinginformation.
Output: A legal ﬂoorplan is a ﬂoorplan satisfying the
followingconstraintsandobjectives:
1. Eachblock bi isassignedtoalocation( xi; yi);
2. notwoblocksoverlap;
3. foreachﬂexibleblock b
i; ai ¼ wi /C2hi;
4. meet aspect ratio constraints, for each ﬂexible
block bi andfortheoverallﬂoorplan;and
5. minimize ﬂoorplan area, wire length and circuit
delay.
Fig.3(a)isaﬂoorplanwith7blocks.
3. Solution encoding and cost evaluation
3.1. Solution encodin g
To have a simple and eﬃcient encoding scheme the
ﬂoorplanner constrains the structure to be slicing, but
allows the circuit modules to have ﬂexible shapes and
free orientations. The layout is represented as a
repetitive division into basic rectangles by horizontal
and vertical cut-lines. Such a layout is called aslicing
structure.Aslicingstructurecanbemodeledbyabinary
tree withn leaves andn /C01 nodes, where each node
representsaverticalcut-lineorhorizontalcut-line,and
each leaf a basic rectangle. This binary tree is called
slicing tree,andthecorrespondingﬂoorplanisa slicing
ﬂoorplan. Letters H and V refer to horizontal and
verticalcutoperators,respectively.Apostordertraver-
sal of a slicing tree produces a Polish expression with
operators H and V, and with operands the basic
rectangles1 ;2; ...; n(WongandLiu,1986).Fig.3gives
arectangulardissection,twopossibleslicingtrees,and
thecorrespondingPolishexpressions.Sincethereisonly
onewayofperformingapostordertraversalofabinary
tree,thereisone-to-onecorrespondencebetweenﬂoor-
plan trees and their corresponding Polish expressions.
The operatorsH and V carrythe followingmeanings:
ijH means rectanglej on-top-ofrectangle i; ijV means
rectangle i to-the-left-of rectanglej. In this work each
solution is encoded as a Polish expression as in Wong
andLiu(1986).
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181168
--- PAGE 3 ---
3.2. Cost e valuation
Unlike constructive algorithms for physical design,
whichproduceasolutiononlyattheendofthedesign
process, iterative algorithms operate with design solu-
tionsdeﬁnedateachiteration.Anevaluationfunctionis
usedtocompareresultsofconsecutiveiterationsandto
selectasolutionbasedonthemaximal(minimal)value
oftheobjectivefunction.
The cost function is a measure of how good is a
particularﬂoorplan.Forﬂoorplanning,threecriteriaare
ofprimeimportance:area,wirelength,andtiming.Area
is estimated by the size of the smallest bounding
rectangle of the ﬂoorplan. Wire length is set equal to
thelengthofallthenets(orinterconnectsoftheblocks)
of the circuit. The length of an individual net or
interconnectisestimatedusingtheSteinertreeapprox-
imation of Youssef et al. (1995). The delay along the
longestpathofthecircuit,takingintoconsiderationthe
estimated interconnect length, is used as a measure of
thetimingperformanceoftheﬂoorplan(Youssefetal.,
1995).
The cost function should reﬂect all objectives.
Traditionally, multiple objectives have been combined
intoascalarobjectivefunction,usuallythroughalinear
combination(weightedsum)ofthemultipleattributes,
orbyturningobjectivesintoconstraints.Onewayisto
assign a constant weight to each of the multiple
objective functions whose value will depend on the
importance of that objective. Assuming that all objec-
tives are to be maximized, the cost of a ﬂoorplan
solution xcanbeexpressedasfollows:
costðxÞ¼ w
1 /C1f1ðxÞþ w2 /C1f2ðxÞþ/C1/C1/C1þwn /C1fnðxÞ; ð1Þ
where nisthenumberofobjectivefunctions,and wi is
theweightofthe ithobjective fi.Theproblemwiththis
weighted sumapproach is thediﬃculty indeterm ining
suitable weights. Adhoc methods are sometimes em-
ployed.
Fuzzy logic.The logic used to infer a crisp outcome
fromfuzzy input values is calledfuzzy logic(Zadeh,
1965;Zimmermann,1996;Kartalopoulos,1996).Using
fuzzy logic approach, optimization of a vector-valued
function is replaced by the optimization of a scalar
function, which is constructed fromthe levels of
satisfactionofdecision-makersbyvaluesofthecompo-
nents of a vector function. Below, we present a brief
introductiontofuzzylogic,andthenshowhowitcanbe
applied in optimization problems with multiple objec-
tives.
Fuzzy set theory:Unlikeinordinarysettheorywhere
anelementiseitherinasetornotinaset,infuzzyset
theory, anelementmay partiallybelong toaset.Lotﬁ
Zadeh deﬁned a fuzzy set as a class of objects with a
continuumofgradesofmembership.Formally,afuzzy
set Aof a universe of discourseX ¼f xgis deﬁned as
A ¼f ðx; m
AðxÞÞjall x 2 Xg, where X is a space of
points and mAðxÞ is a membership function ofx 2 X
being an element ofA. In general the membership
function mAð:Þisamappingfrom Xtotheinterval[0,1].
If mAðxÞ¼ 1,or0,forall x 2 X,thefuzzyset Abecomes
anordinaryset(Zadeh,1965).
Example. As an example, leth refer to height of an
athlete,and‘‘tall’’consideredasaparticularvalueofthe
fuzzy variable ‘‘height’’. Then for eachh in the range
from0 to hmax, mtallðhÞ2½ 0;1/C138indicates the extent to
which h is considered to be tall;mtallðhÞ is called the
membershipfunction.
Example. As another example, consider the possible
heights of sportsmen in feet to be H ¼
f3:5;4:0;4:5;5:0;5:5;6:0;6:5g. Heights around 4.5 feet
areconsideredshort( S),around5.5feetareconsidered
moderate (M), and heights around 6.0 feet are
consideredtall( T).Thus,short,moderate,andtallare
notcrisplydeﬁned.Fuzzysetsforshort,moderate,and
tall may be expressed as sets of ordered pairs
fðx; mAðxÞÞ jall x 2 Xg, where the ﬁrst element of the
pair is the height and the second is its membership in
thatset.Fromourpreviousknowledgewecandeﬁnethe
fuzzysets S, Mand T asfollows:
S ¼fð3:5;1:0Þ; ð4:0;1:0Þ; ð4:5;1:0Þ; ð5:0;0:3Þ;
ð5:5;0:3Þ; ð6:0;0:0Þ; ð6:5;0:0Þg
M ¼fð3:5;0:0Þ; ð4:0;0:0Þ; ð4:5;0:1Þ; ð5:0;0:5Þ;
ð5:5;1:0Þ; ð6:0;0:5Þ; ð6:5;0:1Þg
T ¼fð3:5;0:0Þ; ð4:0;0:0Þ; ð4:5;0:0Þ; ð5:0;0:1Þ;
ð5:5;0:4Þ; ð6:0;1:0Þ; ð6:5;1:0Þg
Fig.1illustratesthethreemembershipfunctions.For
simplicity we have used piecewise linear membership
functions.Membershipfunctionscanalsobecontinuous
curves of many diﬀerent shapes. For example, Fig. 2
illustratesacontinuousmembershipfunctionofafuzzy
set:Anindividual’sweightaround50kg.
Fuzzy operators: As seen above, in fuzzy logic, the
values are not crisp, and their fuzziness exhibits a
distribution described by the membership function. In
ordinary set theory, operations such as union ([),
intersection (\), and complementation (:) are used.
Whatistheresultoftheseoperationsonfuzzysets?This
question has been addressed by variousfuzzy logics.
These are logics that have been deﬁned for operations
on fuzzy sets. One such logic deﬁned by Zadeh is
calledthe min–maxlogic(Zadeh,1965).Thereareother
fuzzylogics,oneofwhichweusedisdiscussedlater.In
min–max logic, the ‘‘union’’, ‘‘intersection’’ and
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181 169
--- PAGE 4 ---
‘‘complementation’’aredeﬁnedasfollows:
mA\BðxÞ¼ minðmAðxÞ; mBðxÞÞ;
mA[BðxÞ¼ maxðmAðxÞ; mBðxÞÞ;
m:AðxÞ¼ 1:0 /C0ðmAðxÞÞ:
Fuzzy rules: Approximate reasoning can be made
basedonlinguisticvariablesandtheirvalues.Rulescan
begeneratedbasedonpreviousexperience.These rules
can then be expressed withIf ... Then statements.
Connectives such asAND and OR can be used in
approximate reasoning to join two or more linguistic
values.
As mentioned above, inmin–max logic, the fuzzy
ANDisrealizedbythefunction min.Ifmorethanone
ruleisusedtoperformdecision-making,eachrulecan
beevaluatedtogenerateanumericalvalue.Then,these
numerical values from various evaluations of diﬀerent
rules can be combined to generate a crisp value on a
higherlevelofhierarchy.
Fuzziﬁcation.Inthiswork,werelyontheexpressive
power of fuzzy logic (Zadeh, 1965, 1975, 1973) to
expressthedesignerobjectivesintheformoffuzzylogic
rules. The evaluation of a ﬂoorplanning solution
consists of the evaluation of the fuzzy rules which
returnavaluerepresentingthedegreeofmembershipof
thatsolutioninthefuzzysubsetofgoodﬂoorplans.The
fuzzylogicrulesareexpressedonlinguisticvariablesof
theproblemdomain.
For ﬂoorplanning, the designer seeks to ﬁnd ﬂoor-
plansoptimizedwithrespecttotheareaoccupiedbythe
ﬂoorplan (area occupied by the cells and wires), wire
length required to interconnet all the cells, and delay
along the longest path of the corresponding circuit
(delays due to the cells and wires). Therefore, the
objectivefunctionisnotascalar,butavectorfunction
/C22FðxÞ¼ð AreaðxÞ;LengthðxÞ;DelayðxÞÞ;
where x is a particular ﬂoorplan solution with area
AreaðxÞ,wirelengthLength ðxÞ,anddelayperformance
DelayðxÞ(Fig.3).
To obtain a fuzzy logic deﬁnition of the above
multicriteriaobjectivefunction,threelinguisticvariables
area, length, and delay are deﬁned Shragowitz et al.,
1997).Inthisimplementation,onlyonelinguisticvalue
is deﬁned for each variable. That is, small area, short
length,andlowdelay.Theselinguisticvaluescharacter-
ize the degree of satisfaction of the designer with the
values of objectives Area, Length, and Delay of the
ﬂoorplan.Thesedegreesofsatisfactionaredescribedby
membershipfunctions m
A; mL,and mD onfuzzysetsof
linguisticvaluessmallarea,shortlength,andlowdelay.
Membership functions for small area, short length
andlowdelayareeasytobuild.Theyarenon-increasing
functions,sincethesmallerthearea,thelength,andthe
delay,thehigheristhedegreeofsatisfaction m
A, mL,and
mD oftheexpertandviceversa(seeFig.4).
To make the membership functions applicable to
diﬀerent designs, the base variables ﬂoorplan area,
length and delay are normalized to the interval [0,1]
(see Fig. 4).The valuesA
min; Lmin,and Dmin are lower
boundsonthearea,totallengthandclockperiodofthe
circuit. A
min isthesumofareasofallcells; Lmin isthe
smallest possible length, computed assuming all con-
nectedcellsareplacedadjacenttoeachother; Dmin isthe
smallestpossibledelayofthecircuit,whichisthedelay
ofthelongestpathduetocellsandassumingminimum
interconnect delay for the nets. The values ofA
max,
Lmax, andDmax are values corresponding to the initial
solution.
The most desirable ﬂoorplan is the one with the
highest membership in the fuzzy subsets small area,
Fig.1. Membershipfunctionsforshort,moderate,andtall.
Fig.2. Continuousmembershipfunctionforthefuzzyset:individual’s
weightaround50Kg.
Fig. 3. (a) Slicing ﬂoorplan. (b) Slicing tree with Polish expression
VH21HHV67V453. (c) Another possible slicing tree with Polish
expressionVH21HV67HV453.
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181170
--- PAGE 5 ---
shortlengthandlowdelay.Suchasolutionmostlikely
does not exist since some of the criteria conﬂict with
each other. Therefore, one has to tradeoﬀ these
individual criteria against each other. This tradeoﬀ is
convenientlyspeciﬁedinlinguistictermsintheformof
oneorseveralfuzzylogicrules.
Asmentionedearlier,afuzzylogicruleisan If–Then
rule.The Ifpart(antecedent)isafuzzypredicatedeﬁned
intermsoflinguisticvaluesandfuzzyoperators( AND
andOR).The Thenpartiscalledtheconsequent.Inour
case, the linguistic value used in the consequent part
identiﬁesthefuzzysubsetofgoodsolutions.Therefore,
theresultofevaluationoftheantecedentpartidentiﬁes
the degree of membership in the fuzzy subset of good
ﬂoorplan solutions according to the fuzzy rule in
question(Shragowitzetal.,1997).
The fuzzy subset of good ﬂoorplan solutions is
characterizedbythefollowingfuzzyrule:
R:0 If ðsmallarea ÞOR ðshortlength ÞOR ðlowdelay Þ
Thengoodsolution :
According to the traditionalmin–max fuzzy logic, the
aboveruleR.0evaluatestothefollowing:
m
ðSÞðxÞ¼ maxðmA; mL; mDÞ;
where mðSÞ is the membership function of the fuzzy
subset of good solutions, andmA, mL,a n dmD are the
membershipfunctionsinthefuzzysubsetsofsmall-area
solutions, short wire-length solutions, and small delay
solutions,respectively.Theminandmaxoperatorsare
non-compensatory, i.e., the weaker elements cannot
compensate for the stronger element. Such property is
undesirable in the case of multi-criteria optimiza-
tion=decision problems. For this category of problems
it is important to make use of all the information
sources. In this case it is recommended to use a
compensatoryinterpretationofthefuzzyORoperator,
which allows all the criteria elements to inﬂuence the
outcomeoftheoperator.Onesuchinterpretationisthe
orlike ordered weighted averaging (OWA) operator
suggested by Yager in Yager (1994); Yager and Filev
(1994) in the context of the softening of the rule
aggregation technique. According to thisorlike opera-
tion,thefuzzylogicruleR.0evaluatestothefollowing:
m
ðSÞðxÞ¼ b /C2maxðm1; m2; m3Þþð 1 /C0bÞ/C21
3
X3
i¼1
miðxÞ;
ð2Þ
where mðSÞ is the membership function of the fuzzy
subsetofgoodsolutions,and bisaparameterbetween0
and 1 indicating the degree of nearness of this orlike
operator to the strict meaning of the logical OR
operator.When b ¼1,theorlikeoperatorbehaveslike
aregularmaxoperator,andfor b ¼0itbehaveslikea
weightedaveragingoperator.
Individual objective criteria can be given relative
rankingtoreﬂecttheirimportance.Thiscanbeachieved
by assigning weights as exponents to individual mem-
bershipfunctions.Whenthemembershipfunctionofa
particularcriterion isassignedapositive exponent less
than 1, we say that the corresponding fuzzy subset is
dilated. This corresponds to giving more empha-
sis=importance to that criterion. Concentration corre-
spondstothecaseofassigninganexponentgreaterthan
1 (Mendel, 1995). For example, in the case of ﬂoor-
planningproblem,Areaisamoresigniﬁcantcriterion,
whereas Length and Delay are of equal but less
importance. Such preferences can be conveniently
expressedbyusingdilationandconcentrationoperators.
Withthesepreferences,Eq.(2)becomes
m
ðSÞðxÞ¼ b /C2maxðm1=2
A ; m2
L; m2
D
Þþð 1 /C0bÞ
/C21
3ðm1=2
A þ m2
L þ m2
D
Þ: ð3Þ
Inthe aboveequation,the fuzzysubsetrepresenting
solutions with small area is dilated, whereas the fuzzy
subset of solutions with short length and the fuzzy
subsetofsolutionswithsmalldelayareconcentrated.
4. GA, SA, AND TS algorithms
Anyiterativeapproximationalgorithm,beitGA,SA,
orTS,requiresdecisionswithrespect to the following
Fig.4. Normalizedmembershipfunctionsforarea,lengthanddelay.
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181 171
--- PAGE 6 ---
elements:
* asolutionencoding,
* amechanismtogenerateinitialsolutionsfromwhere
theiterativesearchwillproceed,
* anevaluationfunctiontoratesolutionsencountered
duringthesearch,
* perturbationoperatorstocreatenewsolutionsfroma
givencurrentsolution,
* assignmenttotheparametersofthealgorithm,and
* stoppingcriteria.
Below,weprovideabriefdescriptionofeachofGA,
SA, and TS, and illustrate how each algorithmis
adaptedtotheﬂoorplanningproblem.
4.1. Genetic al gorithms
Genetic algorithms (GAs) are robust and eﬀective
optimization techniques inspired by the mechanism of
evolutionandnaturalgeneticsGoldberg,1989;Holland,
1975.Theyarecharacterizedbyaparallelsearchofthe
state space as against a point-by-point search by the
conventional optimization techniques. The parallel
searchisachievedbykeepingasetofpossiblesolutions
to the optimization problem, calledpopulation.A n
individualinthepopulationisastringofsymbolsand
is an abstract representation of the solution. The
symbols are calledgenes and each string of genes is
termeda chromosome.Theindividualsinthepopulation
areevaluatedbysome ﬁtnessmeasure.Thepopulation
of chromosomes evolves from generation to the next
through the use of two types of genetic operators: (1)
unary operators such asmutation and inversion which
alterthegeneticstructureofasinglechromosome,and
(2)higher-orderoperator,referredtoas crossoverwhich
consists of obtaining new individual by combining
geneticmaterialfromtwoselectedparentchromosomes.
Then the new population is selected out of the indi-
viduals of the current population and its oﬀsprings.
Basedontheﬁtnessvalue,twoindividuals( parents)are
selected at a time from the population. The genetic
operators (crossover and mutation) are applied on the
selectedparentstogeneratenewpossiblesolutionscalled
oﬀsprings.ThestructureofbasicGAisgiveninFig.5.
Theapplicationofgeneticalgorithmforanyproblem
requiresarepresentationofthesolutiontotheproblem
asastringofsymbols,achoiceofgeneticoperators,an
evaluation function,aselection mechanism,anddeter-
mination of genetic parameters (population size and
probabilities of crossover, mutation, and inversion).
Eachofthesegreatlyinﬂuencestheperformanceofthe
geneticalgorithm.
In this work, a chromosome in the population
(solution)isaPolishexpressionrepresentingaparticular
slicing ﬂoorplan (see Section 3.1, Fig. 3). The initial
population consists of randomly generated Polish
expressions withn operands andn /C01 operators. The
ﬁtness function is a measure of how good each
individual of current generation is with respect to the
desired features. For each chromosome x; fitness
ðxÞ¼ m
ðSÞðxÞ, wheremðSÞ is as deﬁned in Eq. (3). The
choice of parents fromthe set of individuals that
comprise the population (also known as the mating
pool) is probabilistic. In keeping with the ideas of
natural selection, we assume that stronger individuals,
thatis,thosewithhigherﬁtnessvalues,aremorelikely
tomatethantheweakerones.Onewaytosimulatethis
is to select parents with a probability that is directly
proportional to their ﬁtness values. This method is
calledthe roulette-wheel method(Goldberg,1989).
Crossover.Crossoverisamechanismforprobabilistic
inheritance of useful information from two ﬁt indi-
vidualstooﬀsprings.Themainideaisthatthegenetic
informationofagoodsolutionisspreadovertheentire
population.Thus,thebestsolutioncanbeobtainedby
thoroughlycombiningthechromosomesinthepopula-
tion.Crossoveroperationachievesrecombinationofthe
genetic material. The recombination process includes
domainspeciﬁcknowledgetoenforcetheinheritanceof
desirable features fromindividuals of current popula-
tion.Thefollowingthreecrossoveroperatorshavebeen
usedinthiswork(Cohoonetal.,1991).
In the ﬁrst crossover scheme, the operands from
parent P
1 are copied into the oﬀspringO. Then, the
operatorsfromparent P2 arecopiedbymakingaleft-to-
right scan to complete the chromosome. Hence, each
oﬀspring inherits the block structure of one of the
parents. For example, ifP1 ¼ VH21HHV67V453 and
P2 ¼ VH12HV47HV653,then,accordingtothiscross-
over,theoﬀspringwouldbe VH21HVH67V453.
The second crossover operates by copying the
operators fromparent P1 into the corresponding
positions in oﬀspring O. Then, it completes the
constructionof Obycopyingtheoperandsfromparent
P2 by making a left-to-right scan. By propagating
the groups of operators fromP1 to O, this cros-
sover produces an oﬀspring having the same overall
slicing structure as that ofP
1. We call this crossover
‘‘slicing inheritance crossover’’. For example, if
P
1 ¼ VH21HHV67V453and P2 ¼ VH12HV47HV653,
then,accordingtothiscrossover,theoﬀspringwouldbe
VH12HHV47V653.Boththeabovecrossoversproduce
validPolishexpressions.
ThethirdcrossoveremployedinthisworkisthePMX
crossover (partially mapped crosso ver) which has been
widely used in other genetic implementations for
combinatorial optimization problems (Shahookar and
Mazumder,1991).PMXisappliedonlyonthemodules
(operands),theoperatorsandthepositionsfromoneof
theparentsareusedintheoﬀspring(seeFigs.6and7).
Mutation. Mutation is a means of introducing new
informationintothepopulation.Threesimplemutation
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181172
--- PAGE 7 ---
operatorsareusedinthiswork(WongandLiu,1986):
(1)inversionofarandomlyselectedchainofoperators,
(2)swappingoftworandomlyselectedoperands,and(3)
swapping an operand with an adjacent operator
(provideditresultsinavalidPolishexpression).
Inversion.This operator consists ofrandomly select-
ingtwopositionswithinthestring(achromosome)and
thenlaterallyinvertingthestringbetweenthem.Inthis
work,itisimplementedsoastomakeafullright-to-left
or left-to-right lateral inversion on the entire string of
Fig.5. Structureofgeneticalgorithmforﬂoorplanning.
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181 173
--- PAGE 8 ---
operands(only).Forexample,ifthechromosomebefore
inversionis268 HH7H5V4H13VV,thenafterinversion
thenewsolutiongeneratedwillbe:314 HH5H7V8H62VV.
A number of methods have been proposed to select
individuals that can survive and be used in the next
generation (Goldberg, 1989). In this work, among the
parents and their oﬀsprings, the chromosomes for the
nextgenerationarechosenbasedontheirﬁtnessvalues
(higher ﬁtness translates to higher survival). The
probability of mutation is set to 5%, and the prob-
ability of crossover to 80%. Inversion is applied
with a probability of 30%. Population size chosen is
10, and in each generation the number of oﬀsprings
producedisthesameasthenumberofparents.Stopping
criterion in this case was set to a ﬁxed number of
generations.
Fig.6. Crossoverthatpropagatesslicingstructuretotheoﬀspring.
Fig.7. IllustrationofPMXcrossover.
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181174
--- PAGE 9 ---
4.2. Simulated annealin g
Simulated annealing (SA) is an iterative search
methodinspiredbytheannealingofmetals(Kirkpatrick
et al., 1983; Cerny, 1985). Starting with an initial
solution and armed with adequate perturbation and
evaluationfunctions,thealgorithmperformsastochas-
tic partial search of the state space. Uphill moves are
occasionallyacceptedwithaprobabilitycontrolledbya
parameter called temperatureðTÞ. The probability of
acceptanceofuphillmovesdecreasesas Tdecreases.At
hightemperature,thesearchisalmostrandom,whileat
lowtemperaturethesearchbecomesalmostgreedy.At
zerotemperature,thesearchbecomestotallygreedy,i.e.,
onlygoodmovesareaccepted(Kirkpatricketal.,1983;
Cerny,1985).
ThebasicSAalgorithmisshowninFig.8.Thecoreof
the algorithmis the Metropolis procedure, which
simulatestheannealingprocessatagiventemperature
T (Fig. 9) Metropolis et al., 1953. This procedure is
namedafterthescientistwhodevisedasimilarscheme
to simulate a collection of atoms in equilibrium at a
giventemperature.The Metropolisprocedurereceivesas
input the current temperature T, and the current
solution CurS which it improves through local search.
Metropolis must also be provided with the valueM,
whichistheamountoftimeforwhichannealingmustbe
appliedattemperature T.Theprocedure Simulated_an-
nealing simply invokes Metropolis at decreasing tem-
peratures.Temperatureisinitializedtoavalue T
0 atthe
beginning of the procedure (explained below), and is
slowly reduced (in a geometric progression); the par-
ameter aisusedtoachievethiscooling.Theamountof
time spent in annealing at a temperature is gradually
increasedastemperatureislowered.Thisisdoneusing
theparameter b >1.Thevariable Timekeepstrackof
thetimebeingexpendedineachcalltothe Metropolis.
The annealing procedure halts whenTime exceeds the
allowedtime.
The MetropolisprocedureisshowninFig.9.Ituses
the procedure Neighbor to generate a local neighbor
NewS of any given solutionS. The function Fitness
returnstheﬁtnessofagivensolution S.Iftheﬁtnessof
thenewsolutionNew Sisbetterthantheﬁtnessofthe
current solutionS
c, then the new solution is accepted,
andwedosobysettingCur S ¼NewS.Iftheﬁtnessof
thenewsolutionisbetterthanthebestsolution(Best S)
seenthusfar,thenwealsoreplaceBest SbyNews S.If
thenewsolutionhasalowerﬁtnessincomparisontothe
original solutionCurS, Metropolis will accept the new
solution on aprobabilistic basis. A randomnum ber is
generatedintherange0to1.Ifthisrandomnumberis
smaller than e
Dfitness=T, where Dfitness ¼fitness
ðNewSÞ/C0FitnessðcurSÞ,and T isthecurrenttempera-
ture,theinferiorsolutionisaccepted.Thiscriterionfor
acceptingthenewsolutionisknown asthe Metropolis
criterion. The Metropolis procedure generates and
examines Msolutions.
Fig.8. Procedureforsimulatedannealingalgorithm.
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181 175
--- PAGE 10 ---
Initial temperature. The SA algorithmneeds to start
froma high tem peratureðTÞ. However, if this initial
value ofT is too high, it causes a waste ofprocessing
time.Theinitialtemperaturevalueshouldbesuchthatit
allowsvirtuallyallproposeduphillordownhillmoves
tobeaccepted.Thetemperatureparameterisinitialized
usingtheproceduredescribedinWongandLiu(1986).
The idea is basically to use the Metropolis function
(e
DFitness=T) to determine the initial value of the
temperature parameter. Before the start of actual SA
procedure,aconstantnumberofmoves,say M,inthe
neighborhoodofthecurrentsolutionaremade,andthe
respectiveﬁtnessvaluesofthesemovesaredetermined.
Theﬁtnessdiﬀerenceforeachmove i; DFitness
i isgiven
by DFitnessi ¼Fitnessi /C0Fitnessi/C01.Let Mu and Md be
the numberofuphill anddownhill moves, respectively
(downhill refers to inferior moves) (M ¼ M
u þ Md).
Theaverage DFitnessd isthengivenby
DFitnessd ¼ 1
Md
XMd
i¼1
DFitnessi:
Since we wish to keep the probability, sayP0,o f
acceptinguphillmoveshighintheinitialstageofSA,we
estimate the value of the temperature parameter by
substitutingthevalueof P
0 inthefollowingexpression
derivedfromtheMetropolisfunction:
T0 ¼ DFitnessd
lnðP0Þ ;
where P0 /C251 ðP0 ¼0:999Þ.
Parameters, stoppin g criterion. The parametera for
updating the temperature is user speciﬁed. In our
implementation a takes on the value of 0.85, andb is
setequalto1.Ateachupdatedvalueofthetemperature,
anumberofstatetransitionsaremadesoastoreachthe
probabilisticsteadystate.
Theperturbmechanismsemployedaresimilartothe
mutation operators in GA. The stopping criterion is
whentheﬁnal T50:001or A
t=Mt50:05,where At isthe
totalnumberofallacceptedmoves(bothgoodandbad)
and Mt is the number of all moves made at a given
temperature.
4.3. Tabu search
Tabu search is a higher-level method or meta strat-
egy for solving combinatorial optimization problems
(Glover, 1989, 1990). It is an iterative procedure that
startsfromsomeinitialfeasiblesolutionandattemptsto
determineabettersolution.TSmakesseveralneighbor-
hood moves and selects the move producing the best
solution among all candidate moves for current itera-
tion.Thisbestcandidatesolutionmaynotimprovethe
currentsolution.
Selecting the best move (which may or may not
improve the current solution) is based on the suppo-
sition that good moves are more likely to reach the
optimalornear-optimalsolutions.Thesetofadmissible
solutions attempted at a particular iteration forms a
candidate list. TS selects the best solution fromthe
candidate list.Candidatelistsizeisatrade-oﬀbetween
qualityandperformance.
To avoid move reversals, a device called tabu
restrictionisusedthatmakesselectedattributesofthese
moves tabu (forbidden). Tabu restrictions allow the
searchtogobeyondthepointsoflocaloptimalitywhile
still making the best possible move in each iteration.
Taburestrictionsareenforcedbya tabu listwhichstores
the move attributes to avoid move reversals. Tabu list
hasanassociatedsizeandcanbevisualizedasawindow
on accepted moves. The moves which tend to undo
moveswithinthiswindowareforbidden.
Aspiration level component is used to temporarily
overridethetabustatusifthemoveissuﬃcientlygood.
If a move is made tabu in iterationi and its reversal
comesiniteration j,where j5i þ c,(where cisthesize
ofthetabulist),thenitispossiblethatthereversemove
may take the search into a new region because of the
eﬀectsof cintermediatemoves.Thesimplestaspiration
criterion, also known as the ‘‘best cost aspiration
criterion’’, consists of overriding the tabu status if the
reversal produces a solution better than the best
obtainedthusfar.Anotherapproachistousethesame
attributeofthemovewhichisusedtoidentifythetabu
statusandassociateanaspirationlevelvaluewithit.The
reversalhastodobetterthanthishistoricalaspiration
level.Fig.10illustratestheﬂowoftheshort-termtabu
searchalgorithm.
Onlyshort-termtabusearchwasimplementedinthis
work. Theprogramisexecutedfor250iterations.The
Fig.9. TheMetropolisprocedure.
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181176
--- PAGE 11 ---
size of the candidate list was 20. Three perturbation
schemessimilartothemutationschemeofGA(andalso
used in our implementation of SA) were used to
generate neighborhood solutions. The size of the tabu
listwassetto N=4,where Nisthenumberofblocksin
the ﬂoorplan. For each of the perturbation schemes a
separate tabu list is used. The attributes stored in the
tabulistsarerelatedtotheperturbationscheme.Inthe
casewhereperturbationconsistsofinvertingachainof
operators,theattributestoredisthepositionoftheﬁrst
operator of the chain. For the case of swapping two
randomly selected operands, the attribute consists of
one of the operands (the left operand) involved in the
swap.Theattributerelatedtothecaseofswappingan
operand with an operator, is the operand. For all test
cases, the three tabu lists have the same size, and best
costaspirationcriterionwasused.
5. Experiments and results
The algorithms described in this paper were im-
plementedandtestedonﬁvediﬀerentVLSIcircuits.The
circuits range in sizes between 15 and 141 blocks. The
characteristicsofthesecircuitsaresummarizedinTable1.
AllthreeapproximationalgorithmsGA,SA,andTS,
makeuseofquiteabitofheuristicknowledgeaboutthe
problemdom ain. The existence of several alternative
decisions with respect to each aspect of a particular
algorithm(e.g., initial solution, operators, evaluation
functions,etc.)stronglysuggeststhatsomeimplementa-
tion of the same algorithm may perform better than
other implementations. In this work, we compare the
performanceofthethreealgorithmswithrespecttothe
followingaspects:
1. quality of the best solution identiﬁed by each
heuristic,
2. progressofthe search frominitialsolution ðsÞuntil
stoppingcriteriaaremet,
3. the progress of the cost of the best solution as a
functionoftime(iterationcount),and
4. thenumberofsolutionsfoundatsuccessiveintervals
ofthecostfunction.
Fig.11isaplotofthefuzzycostfunction(membership
in the fuzzy subset of good ﬂoorplans) of the best
ﬂoorplan versus the number of calls to the evaluation
functions(numberofsolutionssearched).Withrespect
to this measure, tabu search ranked ﬁrst, genetic
algorithmsecond, and sim ulated annealing third. The
samerankingwasobtainedwithallﬁvecircuits.Fig.11
showsresultsfortwoofthecircuits,Ckt-3(39blocks)
andCkt-4(45blocks).RecallthattheGA,SA,andTS
ﬂoorplanners are seeking ﬂoorplan solutions with the
largestmembershipfunctioninthefuzzysubsetofgood
ﬂoorplans.
The experimental results reported in this section are
based on a GA implementation identical to that
reportedinShragowitzetal.(1997).TheSAimplemen-
tationisbasedontheworkreportedinWongandLiu
Fig.10. Flowchartoftheshort-termTabusearchalgorithm.
Table1
Characteristicsofcircuitsused
Cktname No.ofcells Amin Lmin Tmin
Ckt-1 15 34800 960.16 34.04
Ckt-2 30 40832 2325.76 28.95
Ckt-3 39 90480 4283.86 11.60
Ckt-4 45 88160 4430.31 16.57
Ckt-5 141 211120 10415.84 20.42
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181 177
--- PAGE 12 ---
(1986).Forallexperiments,thealgorithmwasforcedto
stopafter5000evaluations.
Fig.12illustratesanotherperformanceaspectofthe
three heuristics. For GA algorithm, Fig. 12(a) and (d)
showthevariationofthepopulationﬁtnessversusthe
number of generations. For the SA algorithms, Fig.
12(b) and (e) show the cost of the current ﬂoorplan
solution after every twenty iterations. For the TS
heuristic,Fig.12(c)and(f)showthecostofthesolution
selected at each iteration (the best ﬂoorplan in a
neighborhood of 20 ﬂoorplans). The reader should
observe that TS quickly ﬁnds a good ﬂoorplan with a
high membership value in the fuzzy subset of good
solutions,andoncethere,themagnitudeofuphillmoves
isalwaysverysmall.Incontrast,SAexhibitsthemost
probabilisticbehaviorsincerelativelylargeuphillmoves
continuetobeacceptedevenatrelativelylowtempera-
tures.Thisundesirablebehaviorispartlyduetothefact
thatthecostfunctionisnormalizedtotherange(0,1).
Hence, though a decrease in the membership function
Fig.11. Valueofthemembershipfunction mðSÞ ofthebestsolutionasafunctionofthenumberofsolutionsexamined.(a)ResultsforCkt-3with39
blocks;(b)resultsforCkt-4with45blocks.
Fig.12. ComparisonofsearchpathsofGA,SA,andTS.(a)and(d):GAaveragepopulationcostversusnumberofgenerationsforCkt-3andCkt-4;
(b)and(e):SAsolutioncostforevery20iterationsforCkt-3andCkt-4;(c)and(f):costofTSsolutionsateachiteration,whereeachiterationselects
thebestinaneighborhoodof20solutions,forCkt-3andCkt-4.
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181178
--- PAGE 13 ---
mðSÞ sayfrom0.6to0.4isconsideredlargeinthefuzzy
domain,maystillproducealargeacceptanceprobability
according to the Metropolis function.For example, at
T ¼0:1; e
/C00:2=0:1 ¼0:14. This suggests that the fuzzy
cost diﬀerence in the exponent of the Metropolis
function be multiplied by an inﬂation factor. The
inﬂationfactorshouldbesuchthat,inthecoldregime,
the probability of accepting large and even medium
uphillmovesbeverynearzero.Wehaveconductedsuch
experimentandusedaninﬂationfactorof100.Hence,
ﬂoorplancostwillnolongerbeintherangeof(0,1)but
in the range of (0,100). Fig. 13 illustrates the eﬀect of
usingsuchaninﬂationfactorontheperformanceofSA
algorithms. Fig. 13(a) compares the cost of the best
ﬂoorplanasafunctionofthenumberofiterations,with
andwithouttheuseofinﬂationfactorintheMetropolis
function.Asthereadercansee,resultshavesigniﬁcantly
improved.Figs.13(c)and14(b)showthatthequalityof
thesearchedsubspacehasalsoimproved.Furthermore,
adecreaseinthemagnitudeoftheacceptedbadmoves
hasalsobeenobserved;thereaderisreferredtotheplots
ofFigs.12(b)and13(b).
For GA, the population ﬁtness improves quickly in
theﬁrst200iterationsandthenithitsaplateau.Further,
in the ﬁrst 50 generations the population ﬁtness is
steadily increasing; in the following generations the
Fig.13. ResultsillustratingtheeﬀectofinﬂatingthefuzzycostonperformanceofSAalgorithm.(a)Comparisonofthefuzzycostofthebest
ﬂoorplanwithandwithouttheuseofinﬂationfactor.(b)SAsolutioncostforevery20iterationswhenthefuzzycostisinﬂated.(c)BarchartofSA
withinﬂatedfuzzycost.
Fig.14. BarchartsforGA,SAandTSdepictingthesub-spacesearchedbyeachheuristic.The x-axisis mðSÞ andthe y-axisindicatesthenumberof
solutionsataparticularrangeof mðSÞ.Recallthatthehigherthevalueof mðSÞ thebetteristhecorrespondingﬂoorplansolution.(a)–(c)arechartsof
testcircuitCkt-3and(d)-(f)arechartsofcircuitCkt-4.
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181 179
--- PAGE 14 ---
population ﬁtness occasionally decreases, however the
magnitude of the decrease is relatively small (40:05).
Similar plots were obtained for all circuits. These
experiments conﬁrm the fact that, although all three
heuristics have hill climbing property, TS is the most
greedyandSAistheleastgreedy.
Aﬁnalseriesofexperimentsconsistsofcomparingthe
three heuristics with respect to the searched solution
subspaces.TheresultsaresummarizedinFig.14inthe
formof bar charts. Here again, TS exhibited the best
performance and SA the worst. These bar charts are
very informative as to where each algorithm spent its
time.BothGAandTSconcentratedtheirsearcheﬀorts
in good subspaces, that is, evaluating solutions with
highmembershipinthefuzzysubsetofgoodsolutions.
Incontrast,SAspentmostofitstimeevaluatingpoor
quality solutions. This behavior was observed with all
testcases.
6. Discussion & conclusion
Inthis paper, an experimental comparative study of
three popular approximation algorithms is presented,
viz.,GA,SA,andTSfortheﬂoorplanningproblem.All
three heuristics assume and exploit regularities present
withinthesearchspace,i.e.,searchspaceswheregood
solutionshave higher probabilities of leading to better
solutions.Allthreehavebeenfoundtobeeﬀectiveand
robustonproblemswheresomemeasureofprogresscan
beshown.Allornothingtypesofsearchspaceswhere
oneeitherhasaperfectsolutionornosolutionarebetter
attackedbyexhaustivesearchorevenbyrandomwalk.
The three algorithms discussed incorporate domain
speciﬁc knowledge todictate the search strategy. They
also tolerate some element of non-determinism that
helpsthesearchescapeoutoflocalminima.Theyrely
on the use of a suitable cost function which provides
feedbacktothealgorithmasthesearchprogresses.The
principle diﬀerence among them is how and where
domain-speciﬁc knowledge is used. For example, in
simulatedannealingsuchknowledgeismainlyincluded
inthecostfunction.Elementsinvolvedinaperturbation
are selected randomly, and perturbations are accepted
orrejectedaccordingtotheMetropoliscriterionwhich
isafunctionofthecost.Thecoolingschedulehasalsoa
major impact on the algorithm performance and must
becarefullycraftedtotheproblemdomainaswellasthe
particularprobleminstance.
In the case of genetic algorithms, domain speciﬁc
knowledge is exploited in all phases. The ﬁtness of
individual solutions incorporates domain-speciﬁc
knowledge. Selection for reproduction, the genetic
operations,aswellasgenerationofthenewpopulation
also incorporate a great deal of heuristic knowledge
abouttheproblemdomain.
Tabusearchisdiﬀerentfromtheaboveheuristicsin
that it has an explicit memory component. At each
iteration the neighborhood of the current solution is
partiallyexplored,andamoveismadetothebestnon-
tabusolutioninthatneighborhood.Theneighborhood
functionaswellastabulistsizeandcontentareproblem
speciﬁc.Thedirectionofthesearchisalsoinﬂuencedby
thememorystructures.
In this work our intention has been to study the
behavior of the three heuristics in solving a hard
engineering problem, and not to demonstrate the
superiority of one algorithmover the other over all
problemdom ains. Each one of themhas its m erits.
Actually it would be unwise to generalize the results
reported here over all classes of problems. We believe
that some heuristics are easier to engineer to solve a
particular problemthan others. For the benchm ark
problemusedinthisworktabusearchexhibitedbetter
overallbehaviorthanGAandSA.
Recently, an interesting theoretical study has been
reported by Wolpert and Macready in which they
proved a number of theorems stating that the average
performance of any pair of iterative (deterministic or
non-deterministic) algorithms across all problems is
identical. That is, if an algorithmperform s well on a
certainclassofproblemsthenitnecessarilypaysforthat
with degraded performance on the remaining set of
problems (Wolpert and Macready, 1997). However, it
shouldbenotedthatthereportedtheoremsassumethat
the algorithms do not include domain-speciﬁc knowl-
edgeoftheproblemsbeingsolved.Obviously,itwould
be expected that a well-engineered algorithmwould
exhibit superior performance to that of a poorly
engineered one. Further, they do not assume any
knowledge about the problems themselves. However
the problemm aybe trivially stated that any algorithm
wouldbeabletoﬁndasolutiontotheproblem.
Ofthethreeheuristicsexperimentedwithinthiswork,
TS exhibited the best performance with respect to
solution quality as well as the quality of the solution
subspace searched. Furthermore, with respect to the
complexity of implementation and tuning of the
algorithms parameters, GA required the most eﬀort.
SAandTSrequiredsimilarandlessereﬀortsthanGA.
On the basis of experiments performed, and for the
targetproblemcategory(ﬂoorplanning),TSisthebetter
ofthethreeheuristics,withGAaclosesecond,andSAa
distant third. Would the same verdict hold over other
problemcategories? To answer such question would
require at least that similar experiments on other
category of problems be performed. Such experiments
are the subject of future work. Also, similar study of
otheriterativeapproximationalgorithmssuchas simu-
lated e volution and stochastic e volution are being
conducted (Sait and Youssef, 1999b; Kling and Ban-
erjee,1989;SaabandRao,1991).
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181180
--- PAGE 15 ---
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge King Fahd University of
Petroleumand Minerals, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, for
support.
References
Cerny,V.,1985.Thermodynamicalapproachtothetravelingsalesman
problem:aneﬃcientsimulationalgorithm.JournalofOptimization
TheoryandApplication45(1),41–51.
Cohoon, J.P., Hedge, S.U., Martin, W.N., Richards, D., 1991.
Distributed genetic algorithms for the ﬂoorplan design
problem. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design 10 (4),
483–492.
Glover,F.,1989.Tabusearch }PartI.ORSAJournalonComputing
1(3),190–206.
Glover,F.,1990.Tabusearch }PartII.ORSAJournalonComputing
2(1),4–32.
Goldberg, D.E., 1989. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization
andMachineLearning.Addison-WesleyPublishingCompany,Inc.,
Reading,MA.
Holland, J.H., 1975. Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems.
UniversityofMichiganPress,AnnArbor,MI.
Kartalopoulos, S.V., 1996. Understanding Neural Networks and
FuzzyLogic }BasicConceptsandApplications.IEEEPress,New
York.
Kirkpatrick Jr., S., Gelatt, C., Vecchi, M., 1983. Optimization by
simulatedannealing.Science220(4598),498–516.
Kling, R.M., Banerjee, P., 1989. ESP: Placement by Simulated
Evolution. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design 8 (3),
245–255.
Mendel, J., 1995. Fuzzy logic systems for engineering: a tutorial.
ProceedingsoftheIEEE83(3),345–377.
Metropolis,N.,Rosenbluth,A.,Rosenbluth,M.,Teller,A.,Teller,E.,
1953. Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines.
JournalofChemicalPhysics21,1087–1092.
Saab, Y.G., Rao, V.B., 1991. Combinatorial Optimization by
Stochastic Evolution. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided
Design10(4),525–535.
Sait, S.M., Youssef, H., 1999a. VLSI Physical Design Automation:
Theory and Practice. McGraw-Hill Book Co., Europe (also co-
published by IEEE Press, New York) 1995 (reprinted with
correctionsbyWorldScientiﬁc1999).
Sait, S.M., Youssef, H., 1999b. Iterative Computer Algorithms for
Optimization Problems. IEEE Computer Society Press, Silver
Spring,MD.
Shahookar, K., Mazumder, P., 1991. VLSI cell placement. ACM
ComputingSurveys23(2),143–220.
Shragowitz, E., Youssef, H., Sait, S.M., Adiche, H. 1997. Fuzzy
geneticalgorithmforﬂoorplandesign.Proceedingsofthe1997SPIE
International Symposium, Applications of Soft Computing and
Fuzzy Logic Technology. San Diego, CA, Vol 3165, 27 July–1
August,pp.36–46.
Wolpert, D.H., Macready, W.G., 1997. No free lunch theorems for
optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 1
(1),67–82.
Wong,D.F.,Liu,C.L.,1986.Anewalgorithmforﬂoorplandesign.
Proceedingsofthe23rdDAC.pp.101–107.
Yager, R.R., 1994. On ordered weighted averaging aggregation
operators in multicriteria decision making. IEEE Transactions on
Systems,Man,andCybernetics.SMC-18,pp.183–190.
Yager, R.R., Filev, D.P., 1994. Parameterized andlike and orlike
OWA operators. International Journal of General Systems 22,
297–316.
Youssef,H.,Sait,S.M.,Al-Farra,K.,1995.TimingInﬂuencedforce
directed ﬂoorplanning. European Design Automation Conference
with Euro-VHDL, Euro-DAC’95, Brighton, September, pp. 156–
161.
Zadeh,L.A.,1965.Fuzzysets.InformationandControl8,338–353.
Zadeh, L.A., 1973. Outline of a new approach to the analysis of
complex systems and decisions processes. IEEE Transactions on
Systems,Man,andCyberneticsSMC-3(1),28–44.
Zadeh, L.A., 1975. The concept of a linguistic variable and its
application to approximate reasoning}I. Information Sciences 8,
199–249.
Zimmermann,H.J.,1996.FuzzySetTheoryanditsApplications,2nd
Edition.KluwerAcademicPublishers,Dordrecht.
H. Youssef et al. / Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 14 (2001) 167–181 181